---
layout: default
key: spatiotemporal
title: Spatio Temporal
teaser: /assets/images/research/spatiotemporal.png
---
Cells develop over time, they interact with each other, and perform different functions in different tissues. Consequently, when studying life, cells need to be recorded and modelled across time and space. This realization is answered with large international efforts on generating atlases containing genomic data and the development of new measuring space-time aware molecular technologies. For example, The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) or the International Cancer Genome Consortium (ICGC) collect data on cancers in different tissues. The BrainSpan atlas collected RNA expressions across different brain regions from fetal to adult brains. The Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) collect data on all possible tissues throughout the body, and the Human Cell Atlas (HCA) even goes a step further by collecting single cell data. Novel technologies even can measure on subcellular resolution, like imaging CyTOF to measure proteomic activity, or multiplexed single molecule FISH (smFISH) for measuring RNA across slices of biomaterial.

LCBC uses the spatio-temporal data to get to new biological insights. For example, based on the Brainspan data we characterized how autism-related genes alter expression over development with an important change at birth. Or, we have characterized clustered data in TCGA to reveal overlap of cancer types as well as new subtypes. Alternatively, we have shown that for the DMD gene different isoforms are active in different tissues and explained possible cognitive effects of a malfunctioning DMD gene. To gain these insights LCBC develops new computational analyses to deal with the different data types and modelling questions. As an example, lineage tracing modelling from single cell data in heterogenous tumours, or a imaging-genetics modelling in which we modelled observed genetic variants in Alzheimer patients with physiological effects observed in MRI scans of the brain in one structural equation model.
